Add Kubeflow SDK intro (#185)
kubeflow/blog: _posts/2025-11-07-introducing-kubeflow-sdk.md

---
toc: true
layout: post
comments: true

> title: "Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Python API for Scalable AI Workloads"

Reviewer: I like it too! We also could be more specific:
```
Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Python API to Manage Distributed AI Workloads at Scale”
```

> title: "Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Python API for Scalable AI Workloads"

Reviewer 2: It's very good, a small variation:

```
Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Pythonic API to Run AI Workloads at Scale
```

> title: "Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Python API for Scalable AI Workloads"

Reviewer: > Introducing the Kubeflow SDK: A Pythonic API to Run AI Workloads at Scale

Sounds good to me, updated in https://github.com/kubeflow/blog/pull/185/commits/08e672ae0af8a14df13b92358674babca2effea0, let me know if anyone has any other suggestions

hide: false
categories: [sdk, trainer, optimizer]
permalink: /sdk/intro/
author: "Kubeflow SDK Team"
---

# Unified SDK Concept

Scaling AI workloads shouldn't require deep expertise in distributed systems and container orchestration. Whether you are prototyping on local hardware or deploying to a production Kubernetes cluster, you need a unified API that abstracts infrastructure complexity while preserving flexibility. That's exactly what the Kubeflow Python SDK delivers.

As a data scientist, you've probably experienced this frustrating journey: you start by prototyping locally, writing your training script on your laptop. When you need more compute power, it's time to rewrite everything for distributed training. You containerize your code and rebuild images for every change. You write Kubernetes YAMLs, struggle with kubectl and switch between different SDKs - one for training, another for hyperparameter tuning, another for pipelines. Each step in this process requires different tools, different APIs, and different mental models. What if there was a better way?

> The Kubeflow community started the Kubeflow SDK & ML Experience Working Group (WG) in order to address these challenges. You can find more information about this WG and the [Kubeflow Community here](https://www.kubeflow.org/docs/about/community/).

Reviewer 3: Maybe it would be nice to link our YouTube playlist instead of community page, so readers can directly get up to speed: https://youtu.be/VkbVVk2OGUI?list=PLmzRWLV1CK_wSO2IMPnzChxESmaoXNfrY

# Introducing Kubeflow SDK

> The SDK sits on top of the Kubeflow ecosystem as a unified interface layer. When you write Python code, the SDK translates it into the appropriate Kubernetes resources — generating CRDs, handling orchestration, andmanaging distributed coordination. You get all the power of Kubeflow without needing to understand Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SDK sits on top of the Kubeflow ecosystem as a unified interface layer. When you write Python code, the SDK translates it into the appropriate Kubernetes resources — generating CRDs, handling orchestration, and managing distributed communication. You get all the power of Kubeflow without needing to understand Kubernetes.
```

![kubeflow ecosystem](/images/2025-11-07-introducing-kubeflow-sdk/kubeflow-ecosystem.png)

Getting started is simple:

```python
pip install kubeflow
```
```python
from kubeflow.trainer import TrainerClient

def train_model():
    import torch

    model = torch.nn.Linear(10, 1)
    optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters())

    # Training loop
    for epoch in range(10):
        # Your training logic
        pass

    torch.save(model.state_dict(), "model.pt")

# Create a client and train
client = TrainerClient()
client.train(train_func=train_model)
```

The following principles are the foundation that guide the design and implementation of the SDK:

- **Unified Experience**: Single SDK to interact with multiple Kubeflow projects through consistent Python APIs
- **Rapid iteration**: Reduced friction between development and production environments
- **Simplified AI Workloads**: Abstract away Kubernetes complexity, allowing AI practitioners to work in familiar Python environments

> - **Seamless Integration**: Built to work effortlessly with all Kubeflow projects, enabling end-to-end AI model development at any scale

Reviewer: Agree, updated in https://github.com/kubeflow/blog/pull/185/commits/08e672ae0af8a14df13b92358674babca2effea0

```python
from kubeflow.trainer import TrainerClient, BuiltinTrainer, TorchTuneConfig
from kubeflow.trainer import Initializer, HuggingFaceDatasetInitializer, HuggingFaceModelInitializer
from kubeflow.trainer import TorchTuneInstructDataset, LoraConfig, DataFormat

client = TrainerClient()

client.train(
    runtime=client.get_runtime(name="torchtune-llama3.2-1b"),
    initializer=Initializer(
        dataset=HuggingFaceDatasetInitializer(
            storage_uri="hf://tatsu-lab/alpaca/data"
        ),
        model=HuggingFaceModelInitializer(
            storage_uri="hf://meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct",
            access_token="hf_...",
        )
    ),
    trainer=BuiltinTrainer(
        config=TorchTuneConfig(
            dataset_preprocess_config=TorchTuneInstructDataset(
                source=DataFormat.PARQUET,
            ),
            peft_config=LoraConfig(
                apply_lora_to_mlp=True,
                lora_attn_modules=["q_proj", "k_proj", "v_proj", "output_proj"],
                quantize_base=True,
            ),
            resources_per_node={
                "gpu": 1,
            }
        )
    )
)
```

> One click fine tuning can also be accomplished without any configuration being set. The default model, dataset and training configurations are pre-baked into the runtime:

Reviewer: Sure, added in https://github.com/kubeflow/blog/pull/185/commits/27f0d3d0617bd8988bc680570d10e3b9d1636d0e

```python
TrainerClient().train(

>     runtime=TrainerClient().get_runtime("torchtune-qwen2.5-1.5b"),

Reviewer 2: We may still want to show how to pass the dataset users would want to fine-tune the model with?

)
```

Initializers download datasets and models once to shared storage, then all training pods access the data from there — reducing startup time and network usage.

For more details about Kubeflow Trainer capabilities, including gang-scheduling, fault tolerance, and MPI support, check out the [Kubeflow Trainer v2 blog post](https://blog.kubeflow.org/trainer/intro/).

## Optimizer Client

> The OptimizerClient manages hyperparameter optimization for large models of any size on Kubernetes. It integrates with TrainerClient — you define your training job template once, specify which parameters to optimize, and the client orchestrates multiple trials to find the best hyperparameter configuration.

Reviewer: Makes sense, updated https://github.com/kubeflow/blog/pull/185/commits/ba4dc92429e1bbdb326ab90d35395cbb798e179b

- [**Model Registry Integration**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/59): Seamlessly manage model artifacts and versions across the training and serving lifecycle
- [**Spark Operator Integration**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/107): Data processing and feature engineering through a SparkClient interface
- [**Documentation**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/50): Full Kubeflow SDK documentation with guides, examples, and API references
- [**Local Execution for Optimizer**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/153): Run hyperparameter optimization experiments locally before scaling to Kubernetes
- [**Workspace Snapshots**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/48): Capture your entire development environment and reproduce it in distributed training jobs
- [**Multi-Cluster Support**](https://github.com/kubeflow/sdk/issues/23): Manage training jobs across multiple Kubernetes clusters from a single SDK interface
- [**Distributed Data Cache**](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2655): In-memory caching for large datasets via initializer SDK configuration

> - [**Additional Built-in Trainers**](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2752): Support for more fine-tuning frameworks beyond TorchTune — unsloth, Axolotl, and others

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [**Additional Built-in Trainers**](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2752): Support for more fine-tuning frameworks beyond TorchTune — [Unsloth](https://github.com/unslothai/unsloth), [torchforge](https://github.com/meta-pytorch/torchforge), [Axolotl](https://github.com/axolotl-ai-cloud/axolotl), [LLaMA-Factory](https://github.com/hiyouga/LLaMA-Factory), and others
```
